AraGen v2 and Arabic IFEval (#2786)
huggingface/blog: leaderboard-3c3h-aragen-ifeval.md

---
title: "Arabic Leaderboards: Introducing Arabic Instruction Following, Updating AraGen, and More"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/leaderboards-on-the-hub/thumbnail_3c3h_aragen.png
authors:
- user: alielfilali01
  guest: true
  org: inceptionai
- user: SarahAlBarri
  guest: true
  org: inceptionai
- user: Arwa88
  guest: true
  org: inceptionai
- user: samta-kamboj
  guest: true
  org: inceptionai
- user: neha1710
  guest: true
  org: inceptionai
- user: preslavnakov
  guest: true
  org: MBZUAI
---

# Arabic Leaderboards: Introducing Arabic Instruction Following, Updating AraGen, and More

> We have been working to enhance AI model evaluations within the Arabic language context. Previously, we introduced **AraGen**, one of the first generative Arabic leaderboards, serving as a benchmark for evaluating Arabic LLMs on generative tasks.  

Author: added "At Inception, we have been ..."

As part of our ongoing efforts, we are excited to share the following updates:  

- **Arabic-Leaderboards Space**, launched in collaboration with **Mohammed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)** to consolidate Arabic AI evaluations in one place. This platform currently supports **AraGen 2** and **Arabic Instruction Following**, with plans to expand to leaderboards for Arabic AI models across various modalities.

> - **AraGen 03-25 release** with improvements and updated benchmark.  

Author: all "AraGen 2" is renamed to "AraGen-03-25"

#### Analysis of Ranking Changes

We analyzed model performance under two evaluation scenarios:

- Compared previous system prompt (SP1) vs. current system prompt (SP2) using the latest AraGen version (**AraGen-03-25**).
- Assessed the impact of updating both the dataset and judge system prompt.

The overall rankings were stable, with the top-performing model (*o1-2024-12-17*) consistently maintaining its lead. Notably, we observed a swap in rankings between two Claude models, underscoring the sensitivity of our evaluation approach, especially given their initially close scores.

The only significant change in rankings was for the *gpt-4o-2024-08-06* model, whose performance markedly improved with the updated dataset and prompt. This sudden jump is currently under investigation as part of our ongoing benchmarks-design research.

No major variations occurred solely due to changes in the system prompt, indicating good reproducibility as long as the same judge model (*claude-3.5-sonnet*) is used. However, we anticipate potential variations with smaller or weaker models as judges, where employing the second system prompt (SP2) may enhance consistency.

> As a summary, the robust, consistently top-ranking performance of *o1-2024-12-17* reinforces its reliability for Arabic applications. While recent updates to the evaluation pipeline introduced minor ranking shifts, the overall framework remained stable, with top and bottom performers showing consistency. Many observed ranking adjustments likely reflect typical evaluation error margins due to minor score differences. Notably, the second-ranked model’s score significantly dropped from 78.74% (AraGen-12-24) to 57.38% (AraGen-03-25), clearly indicating that the updated AraGen dataset poses a more challenging benchmark aligned with current advancements in reasoning models.

Reviewer: This seems to indicate that the performance of the second _model_ dropped, which is surprising because if the benchmark is more challenging it would affect all the models. Perhaps you could say that the top score dropped from 82.67 to 70.25, and the rest of the scores dropped even more significantly – scores 2 to 5 were between 70 and 78, and now are between 51 and 57.

Reviewer: And maybe stress that even if leaderboard positions were consistent (which is good), scores had a drop across the board (which is also good going forward, I guess).

Author: thanks for these comments. addressed in the upcoming push

| 5        | o3-mini-2025-01-31         | 51.63%     | 56.08%      | 52.35%       | 36.72%      | 53.53%      | 55.10%  | 56.00%       |
| 6        | deepseek-chat              | 51.00%     | 57.55%      | 53.92%       | 25.61%      | 54.95%      | 56.42%  | 57.55%       |
| 7        | claude-3-5-haiku-20241022  | 44.79%     | 48.92%      | 44.51%       | 32.40%      | 46.67%      | 47.38%  | 48.85%       |
| 8        | o1-mini-2024-09-12         | 43.78%     | 47.55%      | 46.76%       | 28.04%      | 46.27%      | 46.67%  | 47.40%       |
| 9        | Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct  | 43.09%     | 48.82%      | 47.55%       | 19.73%      | 46.59%      | 47.11%  | 48.75%       |
| 10       | gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18     | 40.62%     | 45.10%      | 40.88%       | 27.60%      | 42.06%      | 43.58%  | 44.51%       |

</details>

#### Analysis of 3C3H

As part of our December release, we introduced 3C3H as a new evaluation measure of the chat capability of models, aimed at assessing both the factuality and usability of LLMs’ answers. Over the past three months, we have observed some interesting findings, which we share in this section.

> One emergent trend is that the various dimensions are almost perfectly correlated. In most cases, correct answers are scored as both highly helpful and harmless, while most models fail to maintain this correlation for the conciseness dimension. This generally reflects the way we train these models today, where increased helpfulness is often rewarded with higher verbosity. This trend has recently caught the attention of the research community, as exemplified by the release of OpenAI’s GPT-4.5 model. According to their [use cases section](https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-4-5/), answers from GPT-4.5 are more concise than those from GPT-4, while still being equally helpful.

Reviewer: Not sure I understand the intent of "rewarded". Maybe "a consequence of"?

Author: Basically longer answers are ofter REWARDED by the reward model as more helpful. Will rephrase as "where more verbose answers are often rewarded as more helpful"

<gradio-app theme_mode="dark" space="inceptionai/3C3H-HeatMap"></gradio-app>

We believe that one limitation of this analysis is the zeroing rule, whereby we do not evaluate the other dimensions if the answer is not correct. In the future, we plan to investigate further whether an answer can be helpful despite being incorrect, and how dimensions such as conciseness and harmlessness factor into this evaluation if the answer is not correct.

## Instruction Following Leaderboard

### What is Instruction Following as a Benchmark? 

One of the core capabilities of large language models (LLMs) is their ability to understand and follow human instructions. This skill is crucial for building reliable chatbots, virtual assistants, and AI systems that do what users ask. Without strong instruction-following, a model might generate correct information but in the wrong format, ignore user-specified constraints, or produce unwanted content. Instruction-Following benchmark is standardized, objective way to measure a model's instruction adherence and compare models fairly to drive improvements. 

### Dataset: Arabic IFEval 

> Our work took inspiration from [IFEval](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07911) dataset. IFEval, originally introduced by Google, provides a structured benchmark designed explicitly to evaluate LLMs on their ability to follow verifiable instructions. It consists of prompts containing specific, objectively measurable commands such as “use exactly three bullet points,” “include the word ‘innovation’ twice,” or “limit your answer to 100 words.”  English IFEval dataset contains around 500 prompts covering 25 different types of such verifiable instructions. Evaluation within IFEval is conducted through Python functions that automatically verify whether instructions are followed or not avoiding the need for human evaluators or another AI judge, this makes the evaluations **reproducible and unbiased**. While IFEval dataset has become the standard for assessing English-LLMs, a similarly detailed and structured resource is absent for Arabic, leaving a gap in evaluating Arabic LLMs' instrcution-following capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our work took inspiration from the [IFEval](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07911) dataset. IFEval, originally introduced by Google, provides a structured benchmark designed to evaluate LLMs on their ability to follow verifiable instructions. It consists of prompts containing specific, objectively measurable commands such as “use exactly three bullet points,” “include the word ‘innovation’ twice,” or “limit your answer to 100 words.”  English IFEval dataset contains around 500 prompts covering 25 different types of such verifiable instructions. Evaluation within IFEval is conducted through Python functions that automatically verify whether instructions are followed, avoiding the need for human evaluators or another AI judge. This makes the evaluations **reproducible and unbiased**. While IFEval has become the standard for assessing LLMs responding in English, a similarly detailed and structured resource is absent for Arabic.
```

> **Arabic IFEval** dataset is publicly available for the research community to utilize, test, and contribute to. It is available on Huggingface under [inceptionai/Arabic_IFEval](https://huggingface.co/datasets/inceptionai/Arabic_IFEval)

Reviewer: Nice! What's the license?

Author: cc-by-nc-4.0 like ArGen dataset

| Rank | Model Name                         | Arabic Prompt-lvl (%) | English Prompt-lvl (%) |
|------|------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|
| 1    | claude-3.5-sonnet                  | 72.5                  | 84.7                   |
| 2    | gpt-4o-2024-08-06                  | 70.8                  | 79.4                   |
| 3    | gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18             | 68.1                  | 76.9                   |
| 4    | claude-3.5-haiku                   | 67.1                  | 78.2                   |
| 5    | Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct          | 67.3                  | 83.5                   |
| 6    | Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct          | 60.4                  | 77.6                   |
| 7    | google/gemma-2-27b-it              | 59.4                  | 76.1                   |
| 8    | CohereForAI/aya-expanse-32b        | 56.7                  | 65.1                   |
| 9    | CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r7b-12-2024 | 56.4                  | 74.9                   |
| 10   | meta-llama/Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct  | 58.2                  | 88.2                   |

</details>

## Upcoming Work

> As part of our work we will be adding and updating more leaderboards to the Arabic-Leaderboards Space as our internal work progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of our work we will be adding and updating more leaderboards to the Arabic-Leaderboards Space as our internal work progresses.
```

> In the upcoming releases, we expect to put online a leaderbaord for visual question-answering across multiple tasks powered by camel-bench and kitab from our collaborators at MBZUAI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In upcoming releases, we expect to publish a leaderboard for visual question-answering across multiple tasks, powered by camel-bench and kitab from our collaborators at MBZUAI.
```
